---
title: Climbing Stairs
category: dp
number: 70
difficulty: Easy
order: 0
---

# 70. Climbing Stairs

> You are climbing a staircase. It takes `n` steps to reach the top.
> 
> Each time you can either climb `1` or `2` steps. In how many distinct ways can you climb to the top?
> 
> **Constraints:**
> - `1 <= n <= 45`

Notice that the problem possesses the optimal substructure property. Let $OPT(n)$ be the number of distinct ways to climb to the $n$th step.
- For $n = 1$, there is only 1 way: we take a single step.
- For $n = 2$, there are 2 ways: we either take 2 steps at once, or we take 2 single steps.
- We have $OPT(n-1)$ ways to climb to the $n-1$th step, and for each way, we take one further step to climb $n$ steps in total.
- We have $OPT(n - 2)$ ways to climb to the $n - 2$th step, and for each way, we take 2 steps to climb $n$ steps in total.

Thus, we have $OPT(n) = OPT(n - 1) + OPT(n - 2)$.  Our base cases occurs when $n = 1$ or $n = 2$, so the full Bellman Equation is 

$$
OPT(n) = \begin{cases}
1 & n = 1 \\
2 & n = 2 \\
OPT(n - 1) + OPT(n - 2) & Otherwise
\end{cases}.
$$

## Bottom-up
We first store all the solutions in a hash table, so they can be accessed in constant time. Then we work our way up from $n = 1$ until we reach the desired step number, following the Bellman Equation:
```python
def climbStairs(n: int) -> int:
	solution = {}
	
	for step in range(1, n + 1):
		if step == 1 or step == 2:
			solution[step] = step
		else:
			solution[step] = solution[step - 1] + solution[step - 2]
	
	return solution[n]
```
#### Time Complexity
This is a non-recursive bottom-up approach, so we calculate the time complexity of the for loop. Each iteration takes constant time (if statement and assignments with constant lookup time of the hash table), and there are $n$ iterations. Thus, the total complexity is in $\mathcal{O}(n)$.
#### Space Complexity
We store the number of distinct ways to reach each step below $n$, which is constant. Since there are $n - 1$ elements we must store, the total space complexity is $\mathcal{O}(n)$.
#### An Optimisation
Notice that each call only uses the previous 2 ways—and we only care about the very last step! Thus, there is no need to store the distinct ways for every step, and we can store only the previous 2 steps.

```python
def climbStairs(n: int) -> int:
	if n < 3: return n
	
	minus1, ways = 1, 2
	for step in range(3, n + 1):
		minus1, ways = ways, ways + minus1
	
	return ways
```

We now have the same time complexity of $\mathcal{O}(n)$ but a space complexity in $\mathcal{O}(1)$!
