---
title: Top K Frequent Elements
category: heaps
number: 347
difficulty: Medium
---

# 347. Top K Frequent Elements

> Given an integer array `nums` and an integer `k`, return _the_ `k` _most frequent elements_. You may return the answer in **any order**.
> 
> **Constraints:**
> - `1 <= nums.length <= 105`
> - `-104 <= nums[i] <= 104`
> - `k` is in the range `[1, the number of unique elements in the array]`.
> - It is **guaranteed** that the answer is **unique**.

There are two main ways to solve this problem: the intuitive approach using a heap, and a more efficient method using buckets.
# Heap Approach
A heap stores information about how frequent an element appears, and can efficiently return the most frequent while editing the heap, so it seems to be a natural method to approach this problem. Simply build a max heap using a frequency map, and then pop the $k$ most frequent off the heap and return.

```python
def topKFrequent(self, nums: List[int], k: int) -> List[int]:
	import heapq
	
	count = {}
	for num in nums:
		if num not in count:
			count[num] = 1
		else:
			count[num] += 1
	
	heap = [(count[key], key) for key in count]
	heapq.heapify_max(heap)
	
	ans = []
	for i in range(0, k):
		ans.append(heapq.heappop_max(heap)[1])
	
	return ans
```

## Time Complexity
Heapify takes $\mathcal{O}(n)$ time, and so does building `count`. Each iteration of the loop takes $\mathcal{O}(\log n)$ time due to the heap pop operation. There are $k$ iterations, but notice that $k$ is in $\mathcal{O}(n)$. Thus the loop takes $\mathcal{O}(n \log n )$ run time. Since that dominates, the total algorithm has $\mathcal{O}(n \log n)$ time complexity.
## Space Complexity
The heap takes $\mathcal{O}(n)$ space, since in the worst case it stores $n$ different elements. All other variables take constant space, so the total space complexity is in $\mathcal{O}(n)$.

# Bucket Sort
Consider two important points when gathering the top $k$ elements.

- The data is fixed—there is no need to constantly update our understanding of what the most frequent elements are. Once elements have been sorted by frequency, we don't need to do any further editing of the heaps.
- Order doesn't matter, so we don't need to gather the top $k$ element in a sorted order—and there is no need to perform any $\mathcal{O}(\log n)$ sorting after gathering.

A heap therefore is not necessarily needed, since we don't need to maintain an order nor deal with shifting frequencies. Instead, we can simply sort elements by frequency, and then return the $k$ most frequent.

```text
def topKFrequent(nums: List[int], k: int) -> List[int]:
	Build frequency map of elements
	
	sorted = []
	Place elements into sorted according to frequency
	
	res = []
	for i in range(len(sorted), len(sorted) - k, -1):
		res.append(sorted[i])
		
	return res
```

The question is then how we can sort elements by frequency efficiently.  Naively 
sorting takes $\mathcal{O}(\log n)$ and thus does not improve on the heap algorithm:

```python
sorted_elements = sorted(count.keys, key=lambda num: count[num])
return sorted_elements[-k:]
```

Instead, notice that a frequency of an element can only range between 1 and $n$, 
where all the elements of `nums` are the same. And since we can create a 
frequency map of the elements efficiently, we can group elements by frequencies 
into "buckets". Since order doesn't matter, we can iterate through these groups however we wish 
to return the most frequent ones!

```python
def topKFrequent(nums: List[int], k: int) -> List[int]:
	# build frequency map
	count = {}
	for num in nums:
		if num not in count:
			count[num] = 1
		else:
			count[num] += 1
			
	# build "buckets" of frequencies
	sorted_freqs = [set() for _ in range(len(nums))]
	for num in count:
		# for every unique element, put it in 
		# its respective frequency bucket since we are
		# guaranteed that its frequency is between 1 and n
		sorted_freqs[count[num]].add(num)
	
	res = []
	# going from most frequent to least, add elements until
	# there are k elements in the result
	for i in range(len(sorted_freqs) - 1, 0, -1):
		for num in sorted_freqs[i]:
			res.append(num)
			if len(res) == k:
				return res
				
	return res
```

## Time Complexity
In the worst case, there are $n$ unique elements all with frequency $1$. Then building the frequency map takes $\mathcal{O}(n)$ time, building the buckets $\mathcal{O}(n)$ time, and adding elements $\mathcal{\theta}(k)$ time. Since $k \in \mathcal{O}(n)$ as discussed above, the full algorithm is in $\mathcal{O}(n)$ time.
## Space Complexity
Again, in the worst case,  there are $n$ unique elements all with frequency $1$. The frequency map then has $n$ elements and the array of buckets has $n$ buckets with 1 element each. The total space complexity is therefore in $\mathcal{O}(n)$.